>> Woodruff: EGYPT'S MILITARY
LEADERS TAPPED A NEW PRIME
MINISTER TODAY AND LAID OUT A
SIX-MONTH ROADMAP TO RETURN TO
CIVILIAN DEMOCRACY, BUT THE
MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD VOWED TO
OPPOSE THE TIMETABLE.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT: WE GET
THE LATEST ON THE INTERIM
GOVERNMENT'S PLAN FOR NEW
ELECTIONS AND AN AMENDED
CONSTITUTION ON A DAY OF
RELATIVE CALM IN EGYPT.
>> Woodruff: THEN, WE TURN TO
POLITICS OF THE LONE STAR STATE,
WHERE BOTH REPUBLICANS AND
DEMOCRATS SUDDENLY SEE FRESH
OPPORTUNITIES.
>> Ifill: PAUL SOLMAN REPORTS ON
PERFORMING ARTISTS LEARNING THE
R SICS OF BUSINESS IN ORDETO
SURVIVE IN A TOUGH ECONOMY.
>> CAN YOU MAKE A LIVING THESE
DAYS AS A MUSICIAN WITHOUT
SIGNIFICANT ENTREPRENEURIAL
EFFORT?
>> I DON'T THINK SO.
SO, HOW DO YOU BALANCE, YOU
KNOW, DOING MARKETING FOR
YOURSELF AND ALL THESE OTHER
THINGS AND STILL KEEPING UP YOUR
ART FORM?
>> Woodruff: WE UPDATE THE LEGAL
WRANGLING OVER SETTLEMENT CLAIMS
STEMMING FROM THE 2010 GULF OIL
SPILL.
>> Ifill: WE CONTINUE OUR
CONVERSATIONS ABOUT IMMIGRATION
REFORM AS THE HOUSE STEPS UP TO
THE PLATE.
RAY SUAREZ TALKS WITH SOUTH
CAROLINA REPUBLICAN TREY GOWDY.
>> Woodruff: AND HARI
SREENIVASAN LOOKS AT A NEW BOOK
THAT CAPTURES THE STORIES AND
IMAGEOF NS URSES ON THE
FRONTLINES OF HEALTH CARE ALL
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
>> Pelley:
>> THEY TAKE YOUR BLOOD PRESSURE
AND YOUR TEMPERATURE.
BUT I DIDN'T KNOW ABOUT ALL
DIFFERENT KINDS OF NURSES AND
EVERHINYTG THAT THEY DO AND HOW
MANY DIFFERENT WAYS THEY TOUCH
OUR LIVES.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S ALL AHEAD
ON TONIGHT'S NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE INTERIM
LEADERSHIP OF EGYPT TOOK SHAPE
TODAY, AND THERE WERE NEW
PLEDGES OF OUTSIDE AID TO HELP
THE BATTERED ECONOMY.
IT ALL CAME A DAY AFTER MORE
THAN 50 ISLAMIST PROTESTERS DIED
IN A CLASH WITH TROOPS.
>> Reporter: MIDDAY PRAYERS.
MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD SUPPORTERS
ARE DISTRAUGHT AFTER 51 OF THEIR
NUMBER WERE KILLED BY SOLDIERS
NEAR HERE YESTERDAY.
THEY SAID THE VIOLENCE OUTSIDE
AN ARMY BARRACKS HAS REINFORCED
THE COUNTRY'S BATTLEGROUND.
>>.
>> ( translated ): MOHAMED MORSI
IS MY PRESIDENT.
I WILL BECOME A MARTIER LIKE THE
PEOPLE WHO CONSIDER KILLED
YESTERDAY.
>> Reporter: IN THE WAKE OF THE
KILLING, ADLY MANSOUR, THE
INTERIM PRESIDENT, LAID OUT A
TIMETABLE FOR AMENDED THE
EGYPTIAN CONSTITUTION AND
ELECTING A PARLIAMENT AND
PRESIDENT.
A TOP BROTHERHOOD CLERIC
DENOUNCED THE TIMETABLE.
>> ( translated ): WE DO NOT
RECOGNIZE THIS MILITARY COUP OR
WHATEVER CAME AS AN AFTERMATH OF
IT THEREFORE THERE IS NO NEED TO
SPEAK ABOUT ANY DECREES BECAUSE
THEY WERE ISSUED BY PEOPLE
WITHOUT AUTHORITY.
ROUGH RAUF SPOKESMAN FOR EGYPT'S
FOREIGN MINISTRY BRUSHED ASIDE
THE OBJECTIONS.
HE INSISTED THE ARMY WILL HAVE
NO POLITICAL ROLE IN THE FUTURE
AND HE ARGUED THAT LEAVING MORSI
IN POWER WOULD HAVE LEAD TO
CALAMITY.
>> WITHOUT THE INTERVENTION BY
THE ARMY FORCES, IT COULD HAVE A
DISASTROUS SCENARIO, INCLUDING A
POSSIBLE WIDE RANGE OF CIVILIAN
RULE OR CONFLICTS AMONG THE TWO
PARTS OF THE SOCIETY.
>> Woodruff: MANSOUR ALSO
APPOINTED THE PRIME MINISTER
TODAY, AN ECONOMIST, SOCIAL
DEMOCRAT, AND SUPPORTER OF THE
2011 REVOLUTION.
THE JOB WAS ORIGINALLY SET TO GO
TO FORMER DIPLOMAT AND NOBEL
LAUREATE MOHAMMED ELBARADEI BUT
OBJECTIONS FROM HARD-LINE
ISLAMISTS SCUTTLED THAT MOVE.
INSTEAD, ELBARADEI WAS NAMED A
VICE PRESIDENT TODAY.
A SHORT TIME LATER, STATE T.V.
BROADCAST A STATEMENT FROM THE
MILITARY CHIEF WHO ENGINEERED
MORSI'S REMOVAL.
THE GENERAL SAID THE SO-CALLED
ROAD MAP LAID OUT BY THE
MILITARY GAVE "A SPECIFIC
TIMETABLE FOR EVERY STEP OF THE
REBUILDING OF THE CONSTITUTION
IN A WAY THAT WILL GUARANTEE AND
ACHIEVE THE WILL OF THE PEOPLE.
AND THAT MEANS A LANDMARK TO THE
PATH ARE DETERMINED AND CLEAR."
SOME IN CAIRO VOICED HOPE THAT
THE MOVE WILL HELP END THE
VIOLENCE.
>> ( translated ): BY THE END OF
THIS YEAR, WE MUST HAVE A
PRESIDENT, A PARLIAMENT AND A
FINISHED CONSTITUTION SO THAT WE
CAN OVERCOME THE DIVIDED
SITUATION THAT WE ON THE
STREETS RIGHT NOW.
>> Woodruff: IN WASHINGTON,
THERE WAS TENTATIVE PRAISE FROM
WHITE HOUSE SPOKESMAN JAY
CARNEY.
>> WE ARE CAUTIOUSLY ENCOURAGED
BY THE ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE
INTERIM GOVERNMENT THAT IT HAS A
POTENTIAL PLAN FOR MOVING
FORWARD WITH A DEMOCRATIC
PROCESS AND ELECTIONS, BOTH
PARLIAMENTARY AND PRESIDENTIAL
AND WE THINK THAT'S A GOODNG
>> Woodruff: SO FAR, THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION SAID IT WILL
MAINTAIN U.S. AID TO EGYPT.
AND IN A BID TO BOLSTER EGYPT'S
ECONOMY, SAUDI ARABIA AND THE
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES ANNOUNCED
TODAY A TOTAL OF $8 BILLION IN
ASSISTANCE.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR: POLITICAL INTRIGUE IN
THE LONE STAR STATE; ARTISTS WHO
ARE ALSO ENTREPRENEURS; THE B.P.
SETTLEMENT DISPUTE; THE
IMMIGRATION DEBATE GOES TO THE
HOUSE; AND PORTRAITS OF AMERICAN
NURSES.
BUT FIRST, WITH THE OTHER NEWS
OF THE DAY, HERE'S HARI
SENIVREASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: DEMOCRATS IN
CONGRESS ISSUED A WARNING TO
HOUSE REPUBLICANS TODAY ON
IMMIGRATION REFORM.
THEY INSISTED THEY WILL NOT
ACCEPT ANY BILL UNLESS IT
PROVIDES A PATH TO CITIZENSHIP
FOR 11 MILLION PEOPLE LIVING IN
THE U.S. ILLEGALLY.
THE BILL THAT PASSED THE SENATE
LAST MONTH DOES JUST THAT.
BUT IN THE HOUSE, SPEAKER JOHN
BOEHNER SAID THE SENATE MEASURE
IS STILL WEAK ON WHAT HE
CONSIDERS THE MOST FUNDAMENTAL
POINT.
>> THE FIRST BIG STEP THAT YOU
HAVE TO HAVE IS SERIOUS BORDER
SECURITY BECAUSE WITHOUT SERIOUS
BORDER SECURITY WHAT YOU'RE
GOING TO END UP WITH IS THE SAME
THING WE SAW AFTER THE 1986 ACT.
AND SO WE'RE GOING TO -- WE
BELIEVHACH IS THE RIGHT
WAY.
WE'VE TALKED ABOUT IT FOR
MONTHS.
>> Sreenivasan: HOUSE
REPUBLICANS ARE WORKING ON FOUR
SEPARATE BILLS, BUT NONE OFFERS
CITIZENSHIP.
BOEHNER HAS SAID THE HOUSE WILL
NOT CONSIDER THE SENATE BILL,
BUT SENATE MAJORITY LEADER
HARRY REID SAID THE PRESSURE IS
BUILDING.
>> HE IS SAYING THE BIPARTISAN
BILL THAT WE'VE DONE HE IS NOT
GOING TO TOUCH THAT.
WELL, WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO
PRESS.
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE, THE VAST
MAJORITY OF THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE-- DEMOCRATS AND
REPUBLICANS-- SUPPORT WHAT WE
DID.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'LL HAVE MORE
ON IMMIGRATION LATER IN THE
PROGRAM TONIGHT.
THE DEATH TOLL HAS RISEN TO 15
IN SATURDAY'S FIERY TRAIN WRECK
IN CANADA.
OFFICIALS SAID 50 PEOPLE ARE
STILL MISSING IN THE SMALL TOWN
IN QUEBEC.
THEY ALSO ANNOUNCED THEY'VE
OPENED A CRIMINAL INVESTIGAT
INTO WHAT CAUSED THE WRECK BUT
GAVE NO DETAILS.
CANADA'S LARGEST CITY TRIED TO
DRY OUT TODAY AFTER NEARLY
FOUR INCHES OF RAIN TRIGGERED
FLASH FLOODS LAST NIGHT.
THE SEVERE STORM THAT HIT
TORONTO LEFT AT LEAST 300,000
PEOPLE WITHOUT POWER.
THE CITY'S DOWNTOWN CORE WAS
DOTTED WITH CARS THAT PEOPLE
ABANDONED AS THE WATER ROSE.
THE SUBWAY SYSTEM WAS ALSO
SWAMPED, WITH MANY METRO
STATIONS UNDER WATER.
ONE DOUBLE-DECKER COMMUTER TRAIN
STALLED IN THE FLOOD, TRAPPING
ABOUT 1,400 PASSENGERS DURING
THE EVENING RUSH HOUR.
IN ARIZONA, THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE
GATHERED IN PRESCOTT VALLEY TO
HONOR THE 19 FIREFIGHTERS WHO
WERE OVERRUN AND KILLED BY A
WILDFIRE LAST MONTH.
PHOTOGRAPHS OF THE ELITE
FIREFIGHTING CREW WERE ON
DISPLAY IN A PACKED ARENA.
FIREFIGHTERS FROM ACROSS THE
COUNTRY LOOKED ON AS VICE
PRESIDENJOET  BIDEN PRAISED THE
VICTIMS AS MEN OF "UNCOMMON
VALOR."
>> I BELIEVE THEY ANIMATE OUR
NATIONAL IDENTITY, AND I BELIEVE
AMERICA WILL CONTINUE TO BE
DEFINED BY THE EXAMPLE OF THE
19.
19 ORDINARY MEN WHO DID
EXTRAORDINARY THINGS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE YARNELL HILL
FIRE IS NOW 90% CONTAINED, AND
EVACUATION ORDERS HAVE BEEN
LIFTED.
THERE'S NEW TALK THAT PRESIDENT
OBAMA MIGHT PULL ALL AMERICAN
TROOPS OUT OF AFGHANISTAN BY THE
END OF 2014 INSTEAD OF LEAVING A
SMALL SECURITY FORCE.
THE "NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTED
TODAY THE PRESIDENT IS
INCREASINGLY FRUSTRATED IN HIS
ATTEMPTS TO DEAL WITH AFGHAN
PRESIDENT HAMID KARZAI.
A WHITE HOUSE SPOKESMAN SAID THE
"ZERO OPTION" IS ON THE TABLE,
BUT NO DECISION IS IMMINENT.
THE PEOPLE OF PAKISTAN TODAY
DIGESTED NEW DETAILS ON HOW
OSAMA BIN LADEN MANAGED TO LIVE
THERE FOR YEARS UNDETECTED.
WE HAVE A REPORT NARRATED BY
FROM KYLIE MORRIS OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS.
>> Repoer: rtTWO YEARS AFTER
AMERICA'S STEALTH RAID ON THE
ABBOTTABAD COMPOUND THAT KILLED
THE AL QAEDA LEADER, AN
INDEPENDENT COMMISSION IN
PAKISTAN HAS RAKED THROUGH
TESTIMONY TO UNCOVER MORE DETAIL
OF HOW THE BIN LADENS LIVED AND
EXAMINE THE ROLE PLAYED BY BOTH
PAKISTAN AND THE U.S.
ITS REPORT, PUBLISHED ONLINE BY
AL JAZEERA, IS SCATHING IN ITS
CRITICISM OF PAKISTAN'S SECURITY
AND GOVERNMENT APPARATUS,
WHO FAILED TO DETECT THE WORLD'S
MOST NOTORIOUS TERRORIST FOR
NINE LONG YEARS.
IT DESCRIBES COMPLACENCY,
INEFFICIENCY AND NEGLIGENCE
WITHIN THE MILITARY AND THE
COUNTRY'S MAIN INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY, AND INTONES:
>> HOW THE ENTIRE NEIGHBORHOOD,
LOCAL OFFICIALS, POLICE AND
SECURITY AND INTELLIGENCE
OFFICIALS ALL MISSED THE SIZE,
THE STRANGE SHAPE, THE BARBED
VISITORS OVER A PERIOD OF NEARLY
SIX YEARS BEGGARS BELIEF.
>> Reporter: THE POLICE GET
SPECIAL MENTION.
IT WAS A HAPLESS POLICEMAN,
AFTER ALL, WHO, IN 2003, STOPPED
A CAR IN A BAZAAR IN THE SWAT
VALLEY FOR SPEEDING.
INSIDE THE CAR, THE BODYGUARDS
AND FAMILY OF OSAMA BIN LADEN,
AS WELL AS THE MAN HIMSELF.
ACCORDING TO ONE OF HIS
BODYGUARD'S WIVES:
>> HER HUSBAND VERY QUICKLY
SETTLED THE MATTER WITH THE
POLICEMAN, AND THEY DROVE ON.
>> Reporter: SHE SAYS BIN LADEN
WAS CLEANLY SHAVEN AT THE TIME.
AMERICAN DRONES HAD FILMED THE
SHEIKH WEARING WHITE ROBES IN
AFGHANISTAN IN 2000.
BY THE TIME HE'D ESCAPED TO
ABBOTABAD, HE'D DEVELOPED A
TASTE FOR HATS.
ACCORDING TO THE ACCOUNT GIVEN
BY HIS WIVES, BIN LADEN WORE A
>> COWBOY HAT, APPARENTLY TO
AVOID DETECTION FROM DRONES
ABOVE.
WHENEVER HE WAS FEELING
SLUGGISH, HE WOULD TAKE SOME
CHOCOLATE WITH AN APPLE.
>> Reporter: OSAMA HIMSELF SEEMS
TO HAVE PERFORMED THE ROLE OF
MANY A GRANDPARENT: ASSISTING IN
THE CARE OF HIS GRANDCHILDREN.
BUT THERE WERE NO PLAY DATES.
THE FAMILIES LIVED IN VIRTUAL
ISOLATION THROUGHOUT THEIR SIX
YEARS, UNTIL THE AMERICANS CAME
CALLING.
THE REPORT'S AUTHORS ACCUSE THE
AMERICANS OF BEHAVING LIKE
CRIMINAL THUGS.
IT CALLS THE MAY 2nd ATTACK ON
THE COMPOUND AN ACT OF WAR WHICH
ILLUSTRATES ITS ARROGANCE.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY, THE
NOMINEE TO BE F.B.I. DIRECTOR
TOUTED THE VIRTUES OF PHONE AND
INTERNET SURVEILLANCE IN
FIGHTING TERROR, BUT JAMES COMEY
ALSO TOLD HIS SENATE
CONFIRMATION HEARING HE WILL
WORK WITH CONGRESS ON IMPROVING
LAWS THAT GOVERN SURVEILLANCE.
COMEY SERVED IN THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT UNDER PRESIDENT
GEORGE W. BUSH.
HE SAID HE ARGUED STRONGLY
AGAINST EXTREME INTERROGATIONS
OF TERROR SUSPECTS BUT WAS
OVERRULED.
THREE YOUNG WOMEN WHO SPENT A
DECADE IMPRISONED AND TORTURED
IN A CLEVELAND HOUSE HAVE MADE
THEIR FIRST PUBLIC STATEMENTS.
THE WOMEN ESCAPED FROM THE HOUSE
AND THEIR KIDNAPPER IN EARLY
MAY.
IN AN ONLINE VIDEO TODAY, THEY
THANKED THOSE WHO HAVE GIVEN
THEM EMOTIONAL AND FINANCIAL
SUPPORT, AND THEY ASKED FOR
PRIVACY.
MICHELLE KNIGHT, NOW 32, SAID
SHE WILL NOT LET HER LONG ORDEAL
DEFINE HER LIFE.
>> I JUST WANT EVERYONE TO KNOW
I'M DOING JUST FINE.
I MAY HAVE BEEN THROUGH HELL AND
BACK BUT I AM STRONG ENOUGH TO
WALK THROUGH HELL WITH A SMILE
ON MY FACE AND WITH MY HEAD HELD
HIGH.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ACCUSED
KIDNAPPER, ARIEL CASTRO, IS
FACING TRIAL ON 329 COUNTOFS
KIDNAPPING, RAPE AND AGGRAVATED
MURDER.
ON WALL STREET TODAY, THE DOW
JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE GAINED
75 POINTS TO CLOSE AT 15,300.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 19 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3,504.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO GWEN.
>> Ifill: WHEN IT COMES TO
"RED STATES," IT DOESN'T GET
MUCH REDDER THAN TEXAS.
REPUBLICANS HAVE WON 100
STATEWIDE ELECTIONS IN A ROW.
BUT LATELY, DEMOCRATS HAVE BEEN
SAYING THEY CAN TURN TEXAS
BLUE.
WHETHER THAT'S POSSIBLE MAY
HINGE ON A RENEWED DEBATE THIS
WEEK OVER THAT HOTTEST OF HOT
BUTTONS, ABORTION.
THE EYES OF THE POLITICAL WORLD
HAVE TURNED ONCE AGAIN TO THE
TEXAS STATE CAPITOL IN AUSTIN AS
THE HOUSE BEGAN DEBATE OVER
STRICT, NEW ABORTION
RESTRICTIONS.
THE BILL, WHICH WOULD REQUIRE
CLINICS TO UPGRADE TO "SURGICAL-
LEVEL CENTERS" AND FORCE MANY
EXISTING FACILITIES TO CLOSE,
WAS PREVIOUSLY DERAILED AFTER A
DRAMATIC FILIBUSTER.
FORT WORTH DEMOCRAT WENDY DAVIS
SPOKE FOR NEARLY 11 HOURS BEFORE
THE BILL DIED IN A MIDNIGHT
PROCEDURAL DISPUTE.
BUT AFTER GOVERNOR RICK PERRY
CALLED THE LEGISLATURE BACK INTO
A SECOND SPECIAL SESSION THIS
WEEK, ACTIVISTS FOR AND AGAINST
THE LEGISLATION DESCENDED ON THE
CAPITOL AGAIN.
HUNDREDS LINED THE HALLS--
OPPONENTS IN ORANGE, SUPPORTERS
IN BLUE.
>> SO, I'M JUST STANDING HERE
NOT AGAINST WOMEN OR THEIR
RIGHTS BUT JUST AS A WOMAN WHO
HAS EXPERIENCED IT, SAYING, "NO,
WE NEED BETTER CARE FOR OUR
WOMEN."
>> I BELIEVE IN REDUCING THE
NEED FOR ABORTIONS BUT THEN
PROTECTING THE CHOICE.
AND I THINK IT SHOULD BE THE
WOMAN'S DECISION, NOT THE
GOVERNMENT.
>> Ifill: PERRY, THE STATE'S
LONGEST-SERVING GOVERNOR, ADDED
ANOTHER LAYER OF DRAMA TO LONE
STAR STATE POLITICS YESTERDAY BY
ANNOUNCING HE WOULD NOT SEEK A
FOURTH TERM.
>> THE TIME HAS COME TO PASS ON
THE MANTLE OF LEADERSHIP.
TODAY, I'M ANNOUNCING I WILL NOT
SEEK REELECTION AS GOVERNOR OF
TEXAS.
>> Ifill: HIS IMMEDIATE
POLITICAL FUTURE?
UNCLEAR.
>> I WILL CONTINUE WORKING HARD
TO DO WHAT'S BEST FOR TEXAS, AND
THAT INCLUDES THIS SPECIAL
SESSION AND ADDITIONAL SESSIONS
IF REQUIRED.
(LAUGHTER)
>> Ifill: PERRY BRIEFLY SOUGHT
THE REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
NOMINATION IN 2012.
HIS DEPARTURE SETS THE STAGE FOR
A HUGE POLITICAL SHUFFLE IN THE
STATE.
HIS REPUBLICAN HEIR APPARENT,
TEXAS' ATTORNEY GENERAL, GREG
ABBOTT, HAS YET TO DECLARE HIS
INTENTIONS.
AND DEMOCRAT WENDY DAVIS, NOW A
RISING STAR NATIONALLY, IS SAID
TO BE CONSIDERING A RUN.
BUT XAS TEHAS NOT ELECTED A
DEMOCRAT TO STATEWIDE OFFICE
SINCE 1994.
YET THE STATE HAS BECOME A FOND
AMBITION FOR NATIONAL DEMOCRATS
WHO HOPE TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF
MAJOR DEMOGRAPHIC SHIFTS,
ESPECIALLY AMONG HISPANICS WHO
NOW MAKE UP 38% OF TEXAS'
POPULATION, MOST UNDER THE AGE
OF 18.
IS TEXAS REALLY CHANGING?
FOR THAT, WE TURN TO TWO LONE
STAR EXPERTS: JAMES HENSON,
DIRECTOR OF THE TEXAS POLITICS
PROJECT AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
TEXAS AT AUSTIN; AND CAL
JILLSON, PROFESSOR OF POLITICAL
SCIENCE AT SOUTHERN METHODIST
UNIVERSITY IN DALLAS.
JAMES HENSON, GIVEN THE PUSH IN
THE POLL WE'VE BEEN SEEING BACK
AND FORTH IN THE LAST SEVERAL
WEEKS IN THE TEXAS STATE
LEGISLATURE, IS CHANGE REALLY
AFOOT?
>> WELL, THERE'S A LOT OF
THRASHING AND THERE'S POSSIBLY
SOME CHANGE AFOOT AROUND THE
EDGES, BUT IT'S HARD TO SEE A
LONG-TERM CHANGE IN THE
UNDERLYING PATTERNS HERE.
REPUBLICANS HAVE ENJOYED A
SIGNIFICANT ADVANTAGE IN
STATEWIDE RACES IN THE RANGE OF
EIGHT TO 12 POINTS.
THEY HAVE A BIG ADVANTAGE AMONG
THE VOTING POPULATION.
THAT SAID, WE'RE SEEING A
MOBILIZATION AT THE CAPITAL AND
WE'VE SEEM SON INSTITUTIONAL
BREAKDOWNS, PARTICULARLY THE
NIGHT OF THE FILIBUSTER, THAT
ARE PRETTY NEW FOR TEXAS
POLITICS AND AT LEAST THINGS WE
HAVEN'T SEEN IN QUITE A WHILE.
>> Ifill: SO CAL JILLSON,
EVERYTHING I READ TELLS ME THAT
THIS ABORTION BILL WILL
EVENTUALLY BE PASSED EVEN THOUGH
IT WAS DERAIL THERE HAD
TEMPORARILY.
SO WHAT IS THIS UPROAR ALL
REALLY ABOUT?
>> WELL, IT'S NOT MUCH MORE THAN
UPROAR BECAUSE, AS JIM WAS
SAYING, THE REPUBLICANS HAVE HAD
A 10 TO 12-POINT, EVEN 16-POINT
ADVANTAGE OVER THE COURSE OF THE
LAST DECADE AND NO DEMOCRAT HAS
EVEN COME CLOSE.
SO DEMOCRATS WERE REALLY
ENERGIZED WHEN WENDY DAVIS DID
THE FILL BUST ERR WEEK OR SO AGO
SPEAKING FOR 11 HOURS AND IF
YOU'VE SEEN PICTURES OF THAT,
SHE'S A COMPELLING FIGURE.
BUT THAT DOESN'T CHANGE THE
UNDERLYING DYNAMICS OF TEXAS
POLITICS WHICH IS A SUBSTANTIAL
REPUBLICAN MAJORITY.
AND PEOPLE LOOK AT THAT RISING
HISPANIC POPULATION, WHICH THE
2010 CENSUS PEGGED AT 38% OF ALL
TEXANS, BUT ONLY ABOUT 32% OF
CITIZENS ARE HISPANIC AND
HISPANICS TURN OUT AT LOWER
RATES THAN BLACKS AND HISPANICS
SO FOR THE LAST DECADE HISPANICS
HAVE ONLY CAST 20% OF TOTAL
VOTES CAST IN STATEWIDE
ELECTIONS.
THAT'S GOT TO GO UP TOWARD 30%
BEFORE THE DEMOCRATS CAN GET
COMPETITIVE.
>> Ifill: LET'S TAKE THIS APART,
JAMES HENSON.
HOW CAN EITHER PARTY CAPITALIZE
ON THIS NEW RUSH OF NATIONAL
ATTENTION AND INTERNAL STRUGGLE
FOR THE UPPER HAND?
>> WELL, I THINK IF YOU WANT TO
TAKE THE DEMOCRATS FIRST, AS
WE'RE SAYING, IT'S A BILL HILL
TO CLIMB.
BUT IT'S BEEN A LONG TIME SINCE
THE DEMOCRATS HAVE HAD ANY
SIGNIFICANT GOOD NEWS AND I
THINK THAT THEY CAN DO TWO
IN
CAPTURE IF NOT THE ENTHUSIASM--
WHICH IS HARD TO SUSTAIN--
CERTAINLY DATA ATTACHED TO A LOT
OF THE PEOPLE THAT HAVE BEEN
MOBILIZED VIA SOCIAL NETWORKS,
NOT ONLY THAT COME TO THE
CAPITAL HERE IN AUSTIN BUT ALSO
TO WEIGH IN VIA TWITTER, VIA
VARIOUS WEB SITES.
AND THAT GIVES THEM SOMETHING TO
DO.
IT ALSO HAS TO BE SAID THAT THE
BOOST IN FORTUNES FOR WENDY
DAVIS, THE SENATOR YOU MENTIONED
FROM FORT WORTH, IS SIGNIFICANT.
ONE I THINK HAS TO BE VERY
CAREFUL ABOUT OVERSTATING THAT
AND PUSHING HER SORT OF ON TO
THE STAGE BY HERSELF AT THIS
EARLY STAGE IN ALL OF THIS.
BUT I ALSO THINK THAT DEMOCRATS
HAVEN'T SEEN ANYBODY COME OUT OF
THE PACK IN A DECADE LIKE WENDY
DAVIS AND IT DOES AT LEAST GIVE
THE TROOPS AND DONORS THE IDEA
THAT THE DEMOCRATS AREN'T
COMPLETELY DEAD IN THE WATER.
FOR REPUBLICANS I THINK WHAT
YOU'RE GOING TO SEE IS THIS SORT
OF IN COMBINATION WITH GOVERNOR
PERRY RESIGNING IS GOING TO
TRIGGER AN EVEN MORE INTENSE
INTERNAL CONVERSATION AMONG
REPUBLICANS ABOUT WHICH
DIRECTION THE PARTY SHOULD GO.
>> Ifill: CAL JILLSON, WHAT IS
YOUR THINKING ABOUT WHY GOVERNOR
PERRY DECIDED TO STEP ASIDE AND
WHAT HE HAS IN MIND NOW?
>> IT'S A FASCINATING QUESTION
BECAUSE HE WILL HAVE BEEN
GOVERNOR FOR 14 YEARS BY THE
TIME HE FINISHES HIS TERM AND HE
HAS TWO OPTIONS: ONE OF THEM IS
THE ONE THAT EVERYONE IS TALKING
ABOUT, AND THAT IS A SECOND RUN
FOR THER
BUT HE DID SO POORLY IN HIS 2012
ELECTION, SHOWED HIMSELF SIMPLY
NOT TO BE READY, NOT TO BE
COMPETITIVE WITH A FAIRLY WEAK
FIELD, PARTICULARLY ON FOREIGN
POLICY, NATIONAL SECURITY
MILITARY AFFAIRS THAT HE CAN
SPEND THIS NEXT TWO YEARS
PREPARING HIMSELF PUTTING
TOGETHER A NATIONAL-LEVEL
CAMPAIGN TEAM, BUILDING OUT HIS
FUND-RAISING AND GETTING HIMSELF
READY INTELLECTUALLY.
THE OTHER THING IS THAT HE MIGHT
LOOK AT THAT RACE AND DECIDE
"THIS IS TOO STEEP A HILL TO
CLIMB" AND GO TO WORK IN THE
PRIVATE SECTOR AS OTHER TEXAS
POLITICIANS HAVE DONE.
ANNE RICHARDS, WHEN SHE FINISHED
AS GOVERNOR, WENT TO WORK FOR
PUBLIC STRATEGIES, A CONSULTING
FIRM.
AND PHIL GRAMM, THE FORMER TEXAS
SENATOR WENT TO WORK FOR U.B.S.,
SO IT'S NOT IMPOSSIBLE THAT RICK
PERRY GOES INTO THE PRIVATE
SECTOR AND TRIES TO PUT A
FINANCIAL FOUNDATION UNDER
HIMSELF AND HIS FAMILY.
>> Ifill: LET'S TALK ABOUT THE
POLICY ISSUES PLAYING OUT ON THE
NATIONAL LEVEL AS WELL AS THE
LOCAL LEVEL.
THAT WOULD BE ABORTION,
IMMIGRATION, BORDER SECURITY.
DO THE OUTCOME OF THESE DEBATES
DRIVE THE POLITICAL AGENDA IN
THE NEXT FEW YEARS?
>> WELL, I THINK THEY DO AND I
THINK -- AND I THINK THAT WHAT
YOU SEE IS IN TERMS OF RICK
PERRY AND IN TERMS OF WHERE
TEXAS CENTERS INTO THAT, A VERY
KIND OF DIVIDED SITUATION.
ON ONE HAND RICK PERRY SPEAKS
THE LANGUAGE OF SOCIAL
CONSERVATIVES ON ISSUES LIKE
ABORTION AND GAY MARRIAGE AND HE
HAS PURSUED VERY CONSERVATIVE
POSITIONS ON THOSE AND HE CAN
USE TEXAS AS A LAUNCHING PAD FAR
TO A CERTAIN DEGREE WHERE RICK
PERRY IS A LITTLE BIT MORE OUT
OF CHARACTER, IF YOU WILL, IS ON
IMMIGRATION.
PEOPLE MAY REMEMBER THAT EVEN
BEFORE RICK PERRY HAD HIS MORE
FAMOUS GAFFES WITH THE "OOPS"
MOMENT, HE WAS BOOED PRACTICALLY
OFF THE STAGE IN AN ARIZONA
G.O.P. PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY
DEBATE FOR DEFENDING WHAT WAS
ESSENTIALLY THE TEXAS VERSION OF
THE DREAM ACT.
SO TEXAS IS GOING TO BE IN THE
MIDDLE OF THESE CONVERSATIONS
AND PERRY'S INTERESTINGLY
POSITIONED BUT AS CAL SAYS, HE'S
REALLY GOT TO OVERCOME, IF YOU
WILL, THE KIND OF BAD DATE HE
HAD WITH THE ELECTORATE IN 2012.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK YOU, CAL
JILLSON, FINALLY.
LET ME THROW OUT SOME NAMES TO
YOU.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT TED CRUZ,
THE SENATOR FROM TEXAS, JOAQUIN
AND JULIAN CASTRO, THE
DEMOCRATIC TWIN BROTHERS FROM
SAN ANTONIO.
ARE THEY ALSO PART -- WE TALK
ABOUT WENDY DAVIS.
BUT ARE THEY ALSO PART OF THE
PEOPLE EVERYONE IS KEEPING --
PEOPLE ARE KEEPING THEIR EYES
ON?
RISING STARS?
>> YES, CERTAINLY ON THE
DEMOCRATIC SIDE WENDY DAVIS IS
THE RECENT PHENOM BUT JULIAN AND
JOAQUIN CASTRO ARE BOTH YOUNG,
CHARISMATIC, VERY ARTICULATE.
THERE'S ANOTHER DEMOCRAT, KEITH
DIEGO WHO WAS ELECTED TO
CONGRESS FROM THE VALLEY DOWN IN
SOUTHWEST TEXT TX WHO WILL ALSO
BE IN THE MIX ONCE THE
ELECTORATE IS MATURED TO THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY.
THERE WILL BE SOME DEMOCRATS WHO
CAN BE COMPETITIVE STATEWIDE BUT
MOST OF THE PEOPLE WHO LOOK AT
THIS IN A DISPASSIONATE WAY TALK
ABOUT THE FIRST HALF OF THE
2020s FOR THE DEMOCRATS IN
TEXAS.
>> Ifill: CAL JILLSON AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS -- GOT IT
WRONG, AT F.M.U. AND JAMES
HENSON AT U.T. AUSTIN.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Woodruff: NOW, TEACHING THE
ART OF BUSINESS TO ARTISTS
TRYING TO MAKE IT IN A CHANGING
ECONOMY.
NEWSHOUR ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT
PAUL SOLMAN HAS THE STORY, PART
OF HIS REPORTING ON MAKING SENSE
OF FINANCIAL NEWS.
>> Reporter: THE ECONOMIC STATE
OF THE ARTS.
IF YOU THINK THE ECONOMY AS A
WHOLE IS ON SHAKY FOOTING, YOU
SHOULD LOOK AT WHAT'S GOING ON
IN THE CLASSICAL PERFORMING
ARTS.
MORE AND MORE ARTISTS, EVER MORE
HIGHLY SKILLED; FEWER AND FEWER
JOBS, EVER MORE POORLY PAID.
SO, PERFORMING ARTS SCHOOLS--
INCLUDING THE MOST FAMOUS OF
THEM ALL, JUILLIARD-- ARE TAKING
A NEW APPROACH.
DON'T PANIC, JUILLIARD ISN'T
HITTING YOU UP FOR MONEY, NOR IS
PBS INTERRUPTING THIS STORY WITH
YET ANOTHER PLEDGE DRIVE.
YES, BILL BAKER, FORMER
PRESIDENT OF NEW YORK'S PUBLIC
TELEVISION STATION, WNET, IS A
PITCHMAN.
BUT SINCE RETIRING FROM TV AND
KNOWING A THING OR TWO ABOUT
RAISING MONEY, ESPECIALLY FOR
THE ARTS, HE HAS TAUGHT
JULLIARD'S VERY FIRST COURSE IN
THE BASICS OF BUSINESS FOR
PERFORMING ARTISTS.
>> IT'S LIKE SUDDENLY TRYING TO
TEACH THEM CHINESE - THEYD NEVER
THOUGHT OF NUMBERS BEING
ASSOCIATED WITH WHAT THEY DO.
>> Reporter: BUT IS THEIR
ATTITUDE TOWARD BUSINESS ALSO
THAT IT'S KIND OF...
>> DIRTY?
YEAH, THERE IS A LITTLE
RESISTANCE TO THAT, AND WHEN I
SAY THE PERFORMING ARTS IS A
BUSINESS, A NUMBER OF MY
STUDENTS RECOIL.
"A BUSINESS?
THIS IS ART."
AND I TRY TO EXPLAIN THAT, YES,
IT IS AN ART, BUT IT ALSO IS A
BUSINESS.
AND THEY HAVE TO UNDERSTAND THAT
IF THEY'RE GOING TO MAKE IT.
IT'S THAT SIMPLE.
>> Reporter: JUILLIARD NOW GIVES
OUT GRANTS TO PROMOTE
ENTREPRENEURIALISM.
AT THIS MEETING, LAST YEAR'S
WINNERS WERE COACHING THE
CURRENT CROP OF APPLICANTS.
>> THERE IS SOME SORT OF
CONNECTION THAT YOU CAN MAKE,
AND THAT'S NETWORKING.
>> Reporter: JOHN BRANCY AND
TOBIAS GREENHALGH ARE FOUNDERS
OF OPERATION SUPERPOWER, AN
OPERA FOR KIDS WITH AN ANTI-
BULLYING MESSAGE THAT THESE TWO
ARE MARKETING AS A SCHOOL
ASSEMBLY PROGRAM.
>> OUR SUPERWERSPO ARE OPERA
SINGING, D WEAN TEACH THE KIDS
HOW TO DISCOVER THEIR
SUPERPOWERS.
SO, EVERYBODY'S A SUPERHERO.
THAT'S OUR MESSAGE.
>> Reporter: SO, GIVE US A
MOMENT?
>>  WE HEARD YOUR VOICES, A
CALL FOR HEROES
A CRY FOR HEARTS OF COURAGE, A
HOPEFUL MESSAGE
>>  HEARTS OF COURAGE,
>> A HOPEFUL MESSAGE.
>> THAT'S A LITTLE BIT OF IT.
>> Reporter: AND THOUGH THE
ANTI-BULLY BOYS ARE A HARD ACT
TO FOLLOW, KRISTIN OLSON STANDS
OUT WITH WHAT WELL MAY BE A
FIRST FOR A JUILLIARD GRAD: A
MANUFACTURING BUSINESS-- 17th
CENTURY MANUFACTURING.
>> I SPECIALIZE IN HISTORICAL
OBOE REEDS FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE
INTERESTED IN BAROQUE OBOES AND
OTHER TYPES OF OLDER OBOES.
>> Reporter: HOW MUCH MONEY A
YEAR CAN YOU MAKE DOING THAT?
>> MILLIONS AND MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS!
>> Reporter: WHAT WOULD BE A
MORE REALISTIC GUESS?
>> I MEAN, PAYING RENT IS A
PRETTY GOOD GOAL, AND, SO FAR,
IT'S PRETTY CLOSE.
>> Reporter: NOW, OF COURSE,
IT'S NOT EXACTLY NEWS THAT
MUSICIANS MOONLIGHT TO SUPPORT
THEIR ART.
BACH DOUBLED AS A CHURCH CANTOR,
BERLIOZ WROTE MUSIC CRITICISM,
BRAHMS PERFORMED IN BARS AND
BROTHELS, AND VIRTUALLY EVERY
FAMOUS MUSICIAN YOU EVER HEARD
OF HAS TAUGHT.
WE LIVE IN A MUCH RICHER WORLD,
HOWEVER, AND JULLIARD IS MORE
SELECTIVE THAN HARVARD.
YET GONE ARE THE SALAD DAYS WHEN
ITS STUDENTS COULD GRADUATE,
SIGN WITH AN AGENT AND EXPECT
THE GIGS TO JUST ROLL IN.
INSTEAD, THE BEST YOUNG
PERFORMING ARTISTS IN THE WORLD
ARE NOW EXPECTED TO CREATE THEIR
OWN JOBS, FASHION THEIR OWN
CAREERS.
CAN YOU MAKE A LIVING THESE DAYS
AS A MUSICIAN WITHOUT
SIGNIFICANT ENTREPRENEURIAL
EFFORT?
>> I DON'T THINK SO.
>> Reporter: CONDUCTOR DIANE
WITTRY:
>> BUT THE CHALLENGE IS HOW DO
YOU BALANCE, YOU KNOW, DOING
MARKETING FOR YOURSELF AND ALL
THESE OTHER THINGS AND STILL
KEEPING UP YOUR ART FORM?
HOW DO YOU MAKE A WEB SITE?
HOW DO YOU MAKE A DEMO TAPE FOR
AN AUDITION?
I THINK THE SCHOOLS ARE NOW
BEGINNING TO EXPAND THE TRAINING
AND REALIZE THAT
ENTREPRENEURIALISM IS THE ANSWER
FOR THE FUTURE.
>> Reporter: EASIER SAID THAN
DONE.
>> IT IS A LITTLE BIT
DISHEARTENING.
EVEN IF YOU DO HAVE THAT JOB,
THERE ARE SO MANY OTHER THINGS
YOU HAVE TO DO,
>> Reporter: BUT AT JUILLIARD
THESE DAYS, THEY DON'T HAVE TO
GO IT ALONE.
>> I CAME TO JUILLIARD AS A HIGH
SCHOOL KID, YOU KNOW, WANTING TO
PLAY NEW MUSIC.
MY GOAL IN LIFE WAS JUST TO PLAY
NEW MUSIC.
>> Reporter: TO PERCUSSIONIST
ALEX LIPOWSKI, THAT'S CLASSICAL
MUSIC BEING WRITTEN TODAY.
SO, LIPOWSKI GOT TOGETHER WITH
LIKE-MINDED STUDENTS.
>> AND IT SOON BECAME EVIDENT
THAT WE WERENUSFUL IN THIS,
WE SOON REALIZED THAT WE WERE
STARTING A BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: A BUSINESS NOW
CALLED THE TALEA ENSEMBLE.
LIPOWSKI WAS ONE OF BILL BAKER'S
FIRST STUDENTS.
>> THAT SORT OF FIRE WAS LIT,
AND, BEFORE WE KNEW IT, WE WERE
A FULL BLOWN BUSINESS.
IT'S ALL... ALL WE DO NOW.
WE USED TO PRACTICE SIX HOURS A
DAY AND EMAIL FOR TWO.
NOW, MAYBE WE EMAIL FOR SIX AND
PRACTICE FOR, YOU KNOW, TWO.
>> ENTREPRENEURSHIP IS THE
PURSUIT OF OPPORTUNITY WITHOUT
REGARD FOR RESOURCES CURRENTLY
CONTROLLED.
>> Reporter: MEREDITH HODGES
ISN'T AN ARTIST HERSELF; SHE
WORKED IN FINANCE, WENT TO
HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL, WHERE
AN M.B.A. RETAILS FOR A COOL
QUARTER MILLION.
SHE'S NOW EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF
GALLIM, A SMALL MODERN DANCE
COMPANY BASED IN BROOKLYN WHOSE
WEEKLY SALARIES ARE FIRMLY
LODGED IN THE THREE FIGURES.
BUT HODGES THINKS HER BUSINESS
EDUCATION WAS WORTH WHAT SHE
PAID.
>> I USE, TODAY, THE THINGS I
LEARNED EVERY SINGLE DAY.
SOMETIMES IT'S SOFT SKILLS--
NEGOTIATION, PERSONNEL-- AND
SOMETIMES IT'S REALLY SPECIFIC
FRAMEWORKS FOR OPPORTUNITY
SELECTION IN TERMS OF HOW TO
MAKE THE COMPANY GROW QUICKLY,
GROW SUSTAINABLY, CASH
MANAGEMENT AND THOSE KIND OF
ENTREPRENEURIAL AND START-UP
SKILLS THAT WE LEARNED AT
SCHOOL.
I WOULD BE LOST RUNNING THE
COMPANY WITHOUT IT.
>> YEAH, ITS LIKE A START-UP.
>> Reporter: EVEN COMPANY
FOUNDER AND CHOREOGRAPHER ANDREA
MILLER CAN NOW SOUND MORE LIKE A
BUSINESS MAJOR THAN THE
JUILLIARD DANCE STUDENT SHE ONCE
WAS.
>> I THINK I HAVE THE SKILL SET
AND THE DISCIPLINE TO BE ABLE TO
DO THINGS OUTSIDE OF THIS ARTIST
BOX, BECAUSE WHAT I'M ASKED TO
DO IN BUILDING THIS COMPANY--
FUNDRAISING, DEVELOPMENT,
MARKETING-- THIS IS A BUSINESS
TO ME.
I'M BUILDING A SMALL BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: BUT JUST AS IN THE
DAYS OF BACH, BERLIOZ AND
BRAHMS, TODAY'S ARTS
INSTITUTIONS NEED PATRONS TO
KEEP THEM AFLOAT.
>> YOU CAN NEVER MAKE ENOUGH
WITH TICKET SALEAND S TOURING
ALONE.
EVEN AT THESE LOW SALARY RATES
FOR THE COMPANY, THE TIME IT
TAKES TO MAKE A NEW WORK OF ART
IS EXTRAORDINARY AND THE COST OF
THE PDUCTROION ELEMENTS ARE
EXTRAORDINARY.
>> Reporter: IN OTHER WORDS,
WHILE THESE NEW BUSINESSES MAY
HAVE A LOT IN COMMON IN WITH
OTHER STARTUPS, AT THE END OF
THE DAY, THEY'RE STRICTLY NOT
FOR PROFIT.
AND THAT MEANS PERFECTING THE
ART OF THE PITCH.
>> I TRY TO EXPLAIN TO THEM THAT
IF THEY GO TO AN EVENT OR A
PARTY AND THEY PERFORM AND
EVERYBODY APPLAUDS, AND THEN
THEY GO BACK EXHAUSTED INTO
THEIR DRESSING ROOM, THAT'S A
BIG MISTAKE.
THEY HAVE TO COME OUT AND
ASSOCIATE WITH THE PEOPLE THAT
WERE APPLAUDING TO THEM.
>> Reporter: IT IS THEN, SAYS
BILL BAKER, WHO RAN WNET FOR 20
YEARS, THAT AN ECONOMICS MINDSET
CAN MAKE ALL THE DIFFERENCE.
>> MOSTLY BECAUSE EVEN A
BILLIONAIRE CAN'T FATHOM SOMEONE
WHO IS THAT DISCIPLINED, WHO IS
THAT GIFTED.
AND THAT'S WHERE THE MAGIC COMES
IN.
THAT'S WHAT THESE STUDENTS DON'T
OFTEN REALIZE-- THAT THEY HAVE
MAGIC, YOU KNOW.
>> Reporter: AND THAT THEY CAN
TRANSLATE THAT MAGIC.
>> THEY CAN TRANSLATE THAT MAGIC
INTO SUPPORT.
>> Reporter: IN THIS DAY AND
AGE, PERHAPS EVEN MORE THAN IN A
VERY LONG TIME, THEY HAD DARN
WELL BETTER.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, B.P.'S BATTLE
DAMAGES FROM THE BIG OIL SPILL
OF 2010, ONE OF THE WORST
ENVIRONMENTAL ACCIDENTS IN THE
COUNTRY'S HISTORY.
LAST YEAR, THE OIL GIANT AGREED
TO AN UNCAPPED FINANCIAL
SETTLEMENT FOLLOWING THE
DISASTER IN THE GULF OF MEXICO.
THE COMPANY ESTIMATED IT WOULD
PAY NEARLY $8 BILLION TO COVER
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF CLAIMS FROM
BUSINESSES AND AFFECTED
PROPERTIES.
BUT NOW, B.P. SAYS THAT
SETTLEMENT HAS GROWN TO A POINT
WHERE "FICTITIOUS" CLAIMS ARE
BEING MADE.
IN APRIL, A FEDERAL JUDGE IN NEW
ORLEANS, WHO'S ALSO OVERSEEING A
MAJOR CIVIL TRIAL AGAINST THE
COMPANY, REFUSED B.P.'S REQUEST
TO CHANGE THE AGREEMENT.
YESTERDAY, B.P. APPEALED HIS
DECISION BEFORE A THREE-JUDGE
PANEL.
THE COMPANY HAS ALSO STEPPED UP
A PUBLIC CAMPAIGN TO MAKE ITS
CASE, INCLUDING A FULL PAGE AD
IN THREE MAJOR U.S. NEWSPAPERS,
AND IT HAS RELEASED A WEB VIDEO
SAYING IT'S PAID MORE THAN
300,000 CLAIMS TO DATE.
11 MEN LOST THEIR LIVES IN THE
ACCIDENT.
SO FAR, THE COMPANY HAS PAID $11
BILLION FOR ALL CLAIMS.
ADD IN COSTS FOR CLEANUP,
RESPONSE AND PENALTIES FROM THE
GOVERNMENT, AND THE TOTAL COMES
TO NEARLY $30 BILLION OVERALL.
BILLIONS MORE COULD BE IN THE
OFFING; THE CIVIL TRIAL OVER
LIABILITY FOR THE DEEPWATER
HORIZON SPILL RESUMES THIS FALL.
FOR BACKGROUND, I'M JOINED BY
REPORTER PAUL BARRETT, WHO WROTE
A STORY ON THIS FOR "BLOOMBERG
BUSINESSWEEK."
PAUL BARRETT, WELCOME TO THE
PROGRAM.
FIRST OF ALL, WHY THE B.P.
SAYING THAT SOME OF THE CLAIMS
COMING IN NOW ARE FICTITIOUS?
WHAT DO THEY BASE THAT ON?
>> WELL, WHAT THEY'RE SAYING IS
IS THAT IN LOOSENING THE
CRITER
SETTLEMENT FACILITY IS PAYING
THESE CLAIMS A SYSTEM HAS BEEN
SET UP FOR PEOPLE TO COME
FORWARD WITH JUST ABOUT ANY KIND
OF PAPERWORK CLAIMING THAT THEY
HAD A LOSS IN THE YEAR 2010 AND
END UP WITH MILLIONS OF DOLLARS.
THIS IS, OF COURSE, VERY, VERY
STRONGLY CONTESTED BY THE
PLAINTIFFS' LAWYERS ON THE OTHER
SIDE WHO SAY THAT THEY'RE JUST
FOLLOWING THE TERMS THAT B.P.
AGREED TO AND THAT B.P. GOT OUT
OF IT WILL GAITING THESE
THOUSANDS OF CASES IN EXCHANGE
FOR THE SETTLEMENT.
SO YOU HAVE A CLASSIC LEGAL
CLASH.
>> Woodruff: GIVE US AN EXAMPLE
OF ONE OF THESE CLAIMS THAT B.P.
PAID THAT THEY SAY THEY
SHOULDN'T HAVE HAD TO PAY.
>> WELL, I'LL GIVE YOU AN
EXAMPLE FROM ONE OF THE
INTERVIEWS I DID FOR THE ARTICLE
I HAD.
I SPOKE TO A LAWYER IN FLORIDA
WHO SAID HE HAD A REAL ESTATE
AGENT WHO WAS AN HOUR AWAY FROM
THE SHORE WHO HAD LOST SOME
INCOME IN 2010 BECAUSE OF THE
BURSTING OF THE HOUSING BUBBLE
IN FLORIDA BUT MADE AN
$80,000 CLAIM THEY WERE QUITE
CONFIDENT WAS GOING TO GET PAID.
THAT'S THE KIND OF CLIMB THAT
B.P. SAYS IT SHOULD NOT BE
PAYING OUT AND WHEN YOU MULTIPLY
THAT BY TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
CLAIMS IT STARTS TO ADD UP TO A
LOT OF MONEY.
>> Woodruff: BUT AREN'T THESE
DECISIONS BASED ON AN AGREEMENT
THAT B.P. ITSELF MADE?
A FORMULA THAT IT LOOKED AT AND
AGREED TO?
>>.
>> THAT'S RIGHT AS FAAS IR T
GOES.
B.P. TOOK INTO ACCOUNT
GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION AND SOME
VERY, VERY BASIC ACCOUNTING
PRINCIPLES.
BUT THE IDEA WAS THAT PEOPLE
WERE SUPPOSED TO HAVE HAD REAL
BUSINESS LOSSES NOT JUST A PILE
OF PAPERWORK THAT IF SHEA THEY
SHUFFLED IT AROUND MADE IT LOOK
LIKE THEY HAD BUSINESS LOSSES
BUT ACTUAL BUSINESS LOSSES AND
THE COMPANY SAID UNDER THE
SUPERVISION OF THE ADMINISTRATOR
APPOINTED BY THE FEDERAL JUDGE
YOU REFERRED TO IN YOUR SETUP
PIECE THAT MILLIONS AND MILLIONS
OF DOLLARS ARE GOING OUT THE
DOOR TO PEOPLE WHO HAD
ABSOLUTELY NO LOSS RELATED TO
EITHER SPILL IN SPECIFIC OR THE
LARGER ECONOMIC TROUBLES IN THE
GULF REGION THAT OCCURRED AS A
RESULT.
>> Woodruff: HOW DO YOU ACCOUNT
FOR THIS?
YOU DESCRIBE IT AS A WHOLE NEW
WAVE OF CLIENTS THAT HAVE SHOWN
UP IN THE LAST YEAR OR SO.
HOW DO YOU ACCOUNT FOR THAT?
>> WELL, I THINK THAT'S AN
IMPORTANT FACT TO AD IDN.
IT'S NOT AS IF THE SETTLEMENT
THAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT RIGHT
NOW WAS THE FIRST ARRANGEMENT
THAT CAME RIGHT OUT OF THE BOX.
INSTEAD, FOR THE FIRST 18 MONTHS
OR SO AFTER THE SPILL THERE WAS
A WHOLE DIFFERENT SETTLEMENT
PROGRAM.
THAT SET.
PROGRAM ITSELF PAID OUT BILLIONS
OF DOLLARS BUT THERE WAS STILL A
LOT OF LAWSUITS AROUND THE
MARGINS.
SO IN ORDER TO RESOLVE THOSE
LAWSUITS THE COMPANY AGREED TO A
NEW SETTLEMENT AND WITH THE NEW
SETTLEMENT CAME A NEW CLAIMS
ADJUSTER, A NEW GUY WHOSE NAME
IS PATRICK JUNEAU, A LOUISIANA
LAWYER, AND IT WAS UP TO HIM TO
DECIDE HOW THE CONTINUE TO
DISPERSE THE MONEY.
WHEN HE CAME INTO CONTROL OF THE
PROCESS, THAT'S WHEN B.P. SAYS
THE PROBLEMS SET IN.
AND THERE IS SOME SERIOUS
EVIDENCE THAT THERE ARE PROBLEMS
THERE.
I MEAN RIGHT NOW THE FEDERAL
JUDGE HAS GOTTEN TO THE POINT
WHERE HE HAS BROUGHT IN LOUIS
FREEH, THE FORMER HEAD OF THE
F.B.I., TO INVESTIGATE
ALLEGATIONS OF KICKBACKS IN THE
SETTLEMENT PROCESS.
SO THERE IS SOME PRETTY
SUBSTANTIAL SMOKE ON THE HORIZON
AND THE QUESTION IS IS WHAT WILL
FREEH FIND AND WHAT A W THE
FEDERAL APPEALS COURT SAY ABOUT
THE WAY THE SETTLEMENT IS BEING
ADMINISTERED?
>> Woodruff: YOU ALSO WRITE,
PAUL BARRETT, THAT THERE'S A
RISK THAT B.P. IS TAKING BY
GOING OVER THE HEAD OF THE
FEDERAL JUDGE WHO'S DEALING WITH
THE SETTLEMENT QUESTIONS AND IS
ALSO PRESIDING OVER THE CIVIL
TRIAL WE MENTIONED.
>> THAT'S ABSOLUTELY TRUE.
B.P. IS TAKING A BIG RISK.
THEY HAVE ALREADY ANTAGONIZED
THIS FEDERAL JUDGE WHOSE NAME IS
CARL BASH YAY.
HE'S MADE THAT CLEAR
VERY UNHAPPY THAT THE COMPANY
HAS COME BACK AND COMPLAINED
ABOUT THE SETTLEMENT IT AGREED
TO, AS YOU SAY, THE STAKES GO
EVEN BEYOND THIS SETTLEMENT
BECAUSE HE STILL HAS PENDING IN
FRONT OF HIM A TRIAL IN WHICH
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IS
SEEKING UP TO $17.5 BILLION ON
TOP OF EVERYTHING WE'VE BEEN
TALKING ABOUT FROM THE COMPANY.
SO THIS IS A HUGE MESS FOR B.P.
AND IT'S NOT AT ALL CLEAR THAT
THE COMPANY'S LATE IN THE GAME
AGGRESSIVE POSTURE IS ONE THAT
WILL ULTIMATELY SUCCEED.
>> Woodruff: WE TALKED TO A
LEGAL SCHOLAR TODAY ABOUT HOW
UNUSUAL IT IS FOR A COMPANY IN
THIS SITUATION TO APPEAL -- TO
GO AS FAR AS THE APPELLATE
PROCESS OR APPELLATE COURT AS
B.P. HAS DONE AND TALKED HOW
LONG THE ODDS ARE AGAINST B.P.
IN THIS.
>> I THINK THAT'S A FAIR
ASSESSMENT ON TWO COUNTS.
ONE, THAT ONCE THERE'S BEEN A
SETTMENTLE THAT A FEDERAL JUDGE
HAS APPROVED, THE SETTLEMENT HAS
BEEN CHALLENGED AND THE FEDERAL
JUDGE COMES BACK AND SAYS,
NOBODY, IT'S BEING ENFORCED THE
WAY I THOUGHT IT SHOULD BE
ENFORCED, IT'S QUITE UNUSUAL FAR
FEDERAL APPEALS COURT TO
INTERVENE AT THIS POINT.
NORMALLY THEY WOULD DEFER TO THE
TRIAL JUDGE HANDLING THE
SETTLEMENT.
IN A SECOND SENSE, SBOOEP
OBJECTING TO THE WAY A BASIC
CONTRACT IS BEING INTERPRETED.
THAT'S NOT NORMALLY THE BUSINESS
OF AN AUGUST FEDERAL APPEALS
COURT.
CONTRACT INTERPRETATION OF THIS
BASIC LEVEL IS USUALLY LEFT TO
THE TRIAL LEVEL IF THERE'S A
DISPUTE.
SO I THINK THE ODDS FOR B.P. ARE
CONSIDERABLE AND THAT'S WHY B.P.
HAS BROUGHT IN HEAVY-DUTY LEGAL
FIREPOWER.
TED OLSON, ONE OF THE BEST KNOWN
APPELLATE LAWYERS IN THE COUNTRY
HAS PARACHUTED INTO THE CASE ON
BEHALF OF THE COMPANY AND I
THINK OLSON'S INVOLVEMENT IS AN
IMPLICIT THREAT THAT IF WE DON'T
WIN AT THE FEDERAL APPEALS COURT
LEVEL WE'RE TAKING IT TO THE
SUPREME COURT BECAUSE THAT'S
WHAT TED OLSON IS BEST KNOWN FOR
IS HIS U.S. SUPREME COURT
ADVOCACY SO I THINK THAT'S THE
SIGNAL B.P. IS SENDING.
>> Woodruff: PAUL BARRETT WITH
BLOOMBERG "BUSINESSWEEK," WE
THANK YOU.
ONLINE YOU CAN SEE WHAT THE
SPILL HAS COST B.P.
WE HAVE A BY
ONLINE, YOU CAN SEE WHAT THE
SPILL HAS COST B.P.
WE HAVE A "BY-THE-NUMBERS" ON
OUR HOMEPAGE.
>> Ifill: WE RETURN NOW TO THE
TOPIC OF IMMIGRATION REFORM, AND
WHAT'S NEXT ON CAPITOL HILL.
RAY SUAREZ HAS THAT.
>> Suarez: AS WE HEARD EARLIER,
HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER SAYS
HE PREFERS A STEP BY STEP
APPROACH TO THE REFORM WRATHER
THAN THE COMPREHENSIVE BILL
PASSED BY THE SENATE, WHICH
INCLUDES A PATH TO CITIZENSHIP
FOR MILLIONS OF IMMIGRANTS
LIVING IN THE U.S.
ILLEGALLY.
SO WHAT ARE THE ALTERNATIVES?
FOR MORE ON THE OPTIONS BEING
CONSIDERED BY THE REPUBLICAN-LED
HOUSE WE'RE JOINED BY SOUTH
CAROLINA G.O.P. CONGRESSMAN TREY
GOWDY.
HE SERVES AS CHAIRMAN OF THE
HOUSE SUBCOMMITTEE ON
IMMIGRATION AND BORDER SECURITY
WITHIN THE HOUSE JUDICIARY
COMMITTEE.
CONGRESSMAN, WELCOME TO THE
PROGRAM.
YOU'RE THE SPONSOR OF THE
"STRENGTHEN AND FORT FAY
ENFORCEMENT ACT" OR SAFE ACT.
WHAT DOES IT PROPOSE AND HOW
DOES IT DIFFER FROM THE SENATE
VERSION?
>> WELL, IF YOU THINK OF
SECURITY IN THREE DIFFERENT
COMPONENTS THERE'S BORDER
SECURITY, THERE'S E VERIFY AND
THEN INTERNAL SECURITY.
IN OTHER WORDS, VISA OVERSTAYS
OR FOLKS WHO MAY NOT HAVE BEEN
DETECTED AT THE BORDER, THE SAFE
ACT DEALS WITH THE INTERNAL
SECURITY COMPONENT OF THAT AND I
THINK THE PART -- ONE OF THE
PARTS THAT I'M PROUDEST OF IS IT
GIVES STATE AND LOCAL LAW
ENFORCEMENT-- WHICH INCIDENTLY
IS A ROLE IN ALL OTHER FORMS OF
CRIMINAL JUSTICE ENFORCEMENT--
IT GIVES THEM A ROLE IN
ENFORCING OUR COUNTRY'S
IMMIGRATION LAWS AS WELL.
SO IT'S PART OF THAT TRIPOD OF
SECURITY THAT WE HAVE TO HAVE
BEFORE WE GET THE OTHER PART OF
IMMIGRATION REFORM.
>> Suarez: BY GIVING THAT KIND
OF AUTHORITY TO STATE AND LOCAL
LAW ENFORCEMENT DO YOU RUN UP
AGAINST THE SUPREME COURT'S
DECISION LAST YEAR WHEN LOOKING
OVER ARIZONA'S S.B.-1070?
>> IF YOU CAN YOU DON'T DO IT
THE RIGHT WAY.
THE SUPREME COURT SAID WHEN
CONGRESS INTENDS TO FULLY OCCUPY
A FIELD AND THEY HAVE A
CONSTITUTIONAL BASIS FOR FULLY
OCCUPYING THAT FIELD THEN STATES
AND LOCAL TEASE CAN'T PLAY IN
THAT FIELD.
WHEN CONGRESS, HOWEVER,
EVIDENCES AN INTENT OR DUAL
JURISDICTION OR STATES AND LAW
ENFORCEMENT ENTITIES HAVE A ROLE
THERE'S NOTHING CONSTITUTIONLY
INFIRM ABOUT THAT.
SO THIS DOES NOT DISREGARD THE
SUPREME COURT DECISION IT JUST
EXPRESSES CONGRESS'S INTENT AND
GOAL TO HAVE PARTNERS WITH STATE
AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT LIKE
WE DO IN EVERY OTHER CATEGORY OF
CRIME, WHETHER IT BE NARCOTICS
TRAFFICKING, MURDER.
LOOK WHAT HAPPENED IN BOSTON.
YOU HAD BOSTON CITY POLICE
OFFICERS WORKING HAND IN GLOVE
WITH A.T.F. AND F.B.I. AND IF
IT'S GOOD ENOUGH FOR TERRORISM
CASES AND CHILD PORNOGRAPHY
CASES AND NEW YORK TICKS CASES I
THINK IT OUGHT TO BE GOOD ENOUGH
FOR IMMIGRATION CASES.
>> Suarez: YOUR BILL'S INTENT IS
CERTAINLY CLEAR WHEN IT COMES TO
KNOWING WHO'S IN THE COUNTRY,
WHEN THEY GOT HERE AND WHEN THEY
LEAVE.
DOES IT ALLOW FOR A PATH TO
CITIZENSHIP?
>> MY BILL DOES NOT.
HOWEVER-- AND I STRESSED TO MY
FRIEND LUIS GUTIERREZ AND JOE
LOFTON AND THOSE ON THE OTHER
SIDE OF THE AISLE-- YOU MADE
REFERENCE IN THE INTRODUCTION A
STEP BY STEP APPROACH.
NECESSARILY YOU HAVE TO START
WITH A FIRST STEP.
I THINK BECAUSE THERE IS SO MUCH
DISTRUST, AT LEAST IN MY
DISTRICT, OF GOVERNMENT, THEY'RE
GOING TO BE RETICENT TO WANT TO
DISCUSS LEGALIZATION AND
CITIZENSHIP.
IF WE CAN'T GUARANTEE THIS IS
GOING TO BE THE LAST TIME WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE THIS CONVERSATION.
SO I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
START WITH SECURITY, WHETHER
THAT'S BORDER SECURITY, INTERNAL
SECURITY, EMPLOYMENT SECURITY.
REASONABLE MINDS CAN DIFFER AND
SOME FOLKS MAY WANT TO START
WITH LEGALIZATION BUT I CAN TELL
YOU IN MY DISTRICT BEFORE I CAN
CONVINCE FOLKS TO HAVE A
CONVERSATION ABOUT THE 11
MILLION, THEY WANT TO HAVE A
CONVERSATION ABOUT THE 300
MILLION AMERICAN CITIZENS WHO
ARE DESIROUS OF THIS THE LAST
TIME WE ENTERED INTO THE REALM
OF IMMIGRATION REFORM IN THEIR
LIFETIME.
>> Suarez: BEFORE THEY TOOK A
VOTE THE SENATE ADDED A DOUBLING
OF THE SIZE OF THE U.S. BORDER
PATROL, SIGNIFICANTLY MORE MONEY
FOR ELECTRONIC DETECTION AT THE
BORDER AND A SIGNIFICANT
LENGTHENING OF THE FENCE.
DID THAT SWEETEN THE POT ENOUGH
TO ATTRACT YOUR ATTENTION AND
POSSIBLY YOUR VOTE?
>> NO, SIR.
THE SENATE BILL IS NOT GOING TO
PASS IN THE HOUSE AND I DON'T
KNOW HOW TO SAY THAT ANYMORE
PLAINLY THAN THAT.
THAT'S NOT NECESSARILY A
CRITICISM OF MY REPUBLICAN
COLLEAGUES IN THE SENATE WHO, BY
THE WAY, ARE IN THE MINORITY.
BUT IT'S NIT GOING TO PASS IN
THE HOUSE.
KEEP IN MIND, OF THE 11 MILLION
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS, 40%
DIDN'T CROSS ANY BORDER,
SOUTHERN OR NORTHERN.
THEY WERE VISA OVERSTAYS.
SO YOU CAN PUT 200 BORDER PATROL
AGENTS AND UNLESS YOU DEAL WITH
THE INTERNAL SECURITY AND,
VERIFY, YOU WON'T SOLVE THE
PROBLEM.
SO I'M FULLY IN FAVOR OF
ANYTHING THAT MAKES THE BORDER
MORE SECURITY FOR NATIONAL
SECURITY REASONS AND A HOST OF
OTHERS, BUT SIMPLY ADDING
20,000 BORDER PATROL AGENTS
WITHOUT ALSO ADDING PROSECUTORS
AND PROBATION OFFICERS AND
PRETRIAL SERVICE OFFICIALS SRP
SYMBOLIC AND SYMBOLS ARE
IMPORTANT, THAT'S WHY I WEAR A
WEDDING RING.
THEY'RE IMPORTANT BUT IT STRIKES
ME AS BEING SOMETHING OF A
POLITICAL REMEDY AS OPPOSED TO A
REAL REMEDY.
>> Suarez: TODAY HOUSE AND
SENATE DEMOCRATS GOT TOGETHER,
RETURNING TO TOWN FROM THEIR
RECESS AND THEY ANNOUNCED THEY
WOULD NOT VOTE FOR ANY BILL
COMING OUT OF THE HOUSE THAT
DIDN'T INCLUDE A PATH TO
CITIZENSHIP.
DOES THAT MEAN THAT THIS
QUESTION IS BASICALLY FOR THE
MOMENT DEAD?
>> I DON'T THINK SO.
YOU KNOW, I ALWAYS SMILE WHEN I
HEAR THAT IMMEDIATE CITIZENSHIP
FOR 1 MILLION ASPIRING
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS.
SURELY TO GOODNESS NO ONE, NOT
EVEN CHUCK SCHUMER, THINKS ALL
11 MILLION DESIRE CITIZENSHIP.
POLLS INDICATE THAT AS MANY AS
40% WOULD PREFER JUST TO HAVE A
LEGAL WORKING STATUS AS OPPOSED
TO CITIZENSHIP.
SURELY SENATOR SCHUMER DOESN'T
THINK ALL 181 MILLION CAN PASS A
BACKGROUND CHECK.
THERE'S NOT ANY GROUP OF 11
MILLION IN THE UNITED STATES--
IMMIGRANT OR OTHERWISE-- WHO ALL
CAN PASS A BACKGROUND CHECK.
SO WHAT I PREFER TO DO IS LOOK
AT PRESIDENT 11 MILLION IN
NATURAL SUBGROUPS.
WHAT YOU HAVE ARE CALLED THE
DREAM CHILDREN.
I WOULD THINK MOST PEOPLE WOULD
ADVOCATE FOR AN ACCELERATED PATH
TO CITIZENSHIP FOR CHILDREN WHO,
THROUGH NO FAULT OF THEIR OWN,
WERE BROUGHT HERE AT AN EARLY
AGE.
I WOULD HAVE A SHORTENED PATH TO
CITIZENSHIP FOR THOSE WHO SERVE
IN OUR ARMED SERVICES THEN YOU
CAN HAVE A SLIDING SCALE BASED
ON YOUR YEARS IN THE COUNTRY AND
CONTRIBUTIONS YOU MADE TO
SOCIETY.
AGAIN, I DON'T KNOW ANYONE WHO
WOULD ADVOCATE THAT A PERSON
FROM ECUADOR WHO HAS BEEN HERE
FOR 20 YEARS AND MADE SERIOUS
CONTRIBUTIONS TO OUR SOCIETY
SHOULD BE ON THE SAME PATH TO
CITIZENSHIP AS SOMEONE FROM
ECUADOR WHO'S BEEN HERE FOR 20
DAYS!
SO THIS NOTION THAT IT'S 11
MILLION ALL AT ONCE BEFORE YOU
DO ANYTHING ELSE IS SO OVERTLY
POLITICAL AND SO TRANSPARENTLY
POLITICAL SURELY THEY SENATE ORR
SCHUMER DOESN'T BELIEVE THAT AND
IF HE DOES, HE'S RIGHT, THERE
WON'T BE A BILL.
>> Suarez: CONGRESSMAN TREY
GOWDY OF SOUTH CAROLINA, THANKS
FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU, APPRECIATE IT.
>> Ifill: WE'LL GET A DIFFERENT
VIEW ON IMMIGRATION REFORM WHEN
WE SPEAK WITH DEMOCRATIC
CONGRESSMAN RAUL GRIJALVA LATER
THIS WEEK.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT,
THE STORIES OF THOSE AT THE
FOREFRONT OF HEALTH CARE: THE
NURSES WHO SERVE AS HEALERS IN
COMMUNITIES FROM COAST TO COAST.
WE TURN AGAIN TO HARI, WHO
RECORDED THIS CONVERSATION
EARLIER THIS SPRING.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE ARE MORE
THAN THREE MILLION REGISTERED
NURSES IN THE U.S. AND THAT WILL
NOT BE NEARLY ENOUGH IN THE
COMING YEARS AS BABY BOOMERS
NEED MORE ASSISTANCE AND THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT KICKS IN.
A A NEW BOOK CALL "THE AMERICAN
NURSE" LOOKS BEHIND THE NUMBERS
IN A PERSONAL WAY, THROUGH
PORTRAITS AND ESSAYS OF 75 MEN
AND WOMEN IN CARE GIVING
CAPACITIES.
PHOTOGRAPHER AND DOCUMENTARY
CAROLYN JONES SPENT THE LAST TWO
YEARS CHRONICLING THE CHANGES IN
THE HEALTH CARE SYSTEM AND THE
COMPASSION OF THOSE ON THE FRONT
LINES.
SHE INTERVIEWS NURSES WHO CARE
FOR PRISONERS AT ANGOLA PRISON
IN LOUISIANA, THE COAL MINERS IN
KENTUCKY TO WOUNDED SOLDIERS IN
CALIFORNIA AND HOSPICE PATIENTS
IN FLORIDA, AMONG MANY OTHERS.
CAROLYN JONES JOINS ME NOW ALONG
WITH RHONDA COLLINS WHO IS A
REGISTERED NURSE AND VICE
PRESIDENT OF FRESENIUS KABI, THE
HEALTH CARE COMPANY THAT FUNDED
THE PROJECT.
THANKS FOR BEING WITH US.
SO MOST OF US ARE BORN WITH A
NURSE NEARBY AND MANY OF US MAY
HAVE A NURSE NEAR US AT THE END.
WHY THIS PROJECT?
>> RHONDA REALLY WANTED TO
CELEBRATE NURSES AND TO SHINE A
LIGHT ON A PORTION OF THE
POPULATION WE DON'T KNOW VERY
MUCH ABOUT.
SO WE'LL ALL NEED A NURSE
EVENTUALLY IN OUR LIVES AND WE
NEED MORE OF THEM SO WE WANTED
TO GIVE THEM A VOICE.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU WERE A
BREAST CANCER SURVIVOR.
YOU HAD A VERY LONG RELATIONSHIP
WITH A NURSE THROUGH A VERY
PAINFUL PORTION OF YOUR LIFE.
WHAT DIDN'T YOU UNDERSTAND ABOUT
NURSING WHEN YOU TOOK ON THIS
PROJECT?
>> WELL, I HAVE TO SAY, EVEN
THOUGH I WENT THROUGH BREAST
CANCER EXPERIENCE, I REALLY
THOUGHT A NURSE WAS A NURSE WAS
A NURSE.
YOU KNOW?
THEY TAKE YOUR BLOOD PRESSURE
AND YOUR TEMPERATURE AND, IN MY
CASE, I HAD AN EXTRAORDINARY
RELATIONSHIP WITH A WOMAN WHO
GAVE ME CHEMOTHERAPY.
BUT I DIDN'T KNOW ABOUT ALL
DIFFERENT KINDS OF NURSES AND
EVERYTHING THAT THEY DO AND HOW
MANY DIFFERENT WAYS THEY TOUCH
OUR LIVES.
I MEAN, THEY LOOK AT US REALLY
HOLISTICALLY.
SO MY EXPERIENCE WITH THE
CHEMOTHERAPY NURSE WAS A REALLY
PERSONAL AND EMOTIONAL ONE.
SHE GOT ME THROUGH BECAUSE OF
HOW SHE MADE ME FEEL DURING THAT
TIME.
>> Suarez: DID YOUR PERCEPTIONS
CHANGE WHEN YOU FINISHED THIS
BOOK?
>> WELL, YES!
I SAW NURSES DOING THINGS I HAD
NO IDEA THEY DID.
I MEAN, FIRST OF ALL, I SAW
NURSES GO INTO PLACES IN
KENTUCKY, FOR EXAMPLE.
WE WENT TO VISIT A GENTLEMAN
NAMED SIDNEY WHO WAS LIVING IN A
TRAILER AT THE END OF A LONG
ROAD AND WE GOT TO HIS DOOR AND
I THINK THAT THE NURSE THAT WAS
COMING TO VISIT HIM HAD -- HE
HADN'T SEEN ANYONE FOR WEEKS AND
HIS HOME HADN'T BEEN CLEANED IN
WEEKS AND NEITHER HAD HE.
I STOPPED AT THAT DOOR JUST
THINKING "OH, MY GOSH, I DON'T
THINK I CAN WALK IN THERE."
AND THE NURSE, ROBIN McPEAK,
FLEW BY ME, WALKED IN, FOUND AN
AREA, MOVED STUFF AWAY, PUT DOWN
A STERILE AREA AND TOOK HIS
BLOOD PRESSURE AND TOOK HIS
TEMPERATURE AND GAVE HIM KIND OF
THE WARMEST HELLO THAT I'D EVER
SEEN.
AND I THOUGHT, YOU KNOW, THAT'S
A QUALITY I WOULD LIKE TO GET.
I THINK NURSES SPEND AN ENORMOUS
AMOUNT OF TIME DOING THINGS THAT
ARE OUTSIDE OF THE BOX OF WHAT
WE THINK NORMAL NURSING IS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO GIVE ME AN
EXAMPLE OF CARE THAT A NURSE
MIGHT BE PROVIDING THAT YOU
MIGHT NOT KNOW IS COMING FROM A
NURSE?
>> YOU LOOK IN I.C.U.s OR TRAUMA
PATIENTS WHO COME IN, THEY'RE
COMATOSE.
REALLY NURSING, THEN, IS CARING
FOR THE FAMILY.
AND IT'S CARING FOR THOSE AROUND
THEM TO HELP THEM COPE WITH WHAT
YOU KNOW IS A LIFE-CHANGING
EVENT.
WHETHER IT'S A SPINAL INJURY OR
NEUROLOGICAL INJURY, SOMETHING
LIKE THAT, YOU KNOW THAT THIS
CHILD OF THIS LOVED ONE WILL
NEVER BE THE SAME.
AND AS NURSES WE WORK VERY HARD
TO EDUCATE THE FAMILY, TO
PREPARE THEM FOR THE FUTURE
GIVE THEM ALL THE TOOLS AND
RESOURCES THAT THEY NEED TO TAKE
THAT LOVED ONE HOME AND HAVE A
QUALITY OF LIFE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO LET'S TALK A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE HEALTH CARE
SYSTEM NOW.
HOW IS THE ROLE OF NURSING
CHANGING?
>> I THINK THAT NURSES ARE
TAKING A MORE PROMINENT ROLE AS
WE LOOK AT HOW TO CARE FOR OUR
COMMUNITIES AND PROVIDE PRIMARY
CARE.
THERE'S APPROXIMATELY
210,000 PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIANS
IN THE U.S.
THERE'S OVER THREE MILLION
REGISTERED NURSES.
WE BELIEVE THAT NURSES SHOULD
PRACTICE TO THE FULL EXTENT OF
THEIR EDUCATION AND THEIR
EXPERIENCE THAT PRACTITIONERS
CAN PROVIDE SOME PRIMARY CARE.
WE DO HAVE A ROLE IN THIS
CHANGING LANDSCAPE OF MOVING US
FROM A SICK MODEL OF HEALTH AND
JUST TREATING THE ILLNESS TO
FOCUSING ON GROWING HEALTHY
COMMUNITIES THROUGH EDUCATION
AND ACCESS.
THAT'S BEEN ONE OF THE ISSUES
THAT WE'VE ADD IN THIS COUNTRY
IS JUST THE ACCESS TO CARE.
YOU GET INTO RURAL AREAS WHERE
PRIMARY CARE PROVIDERS ARE VERY
LEAN AND SPARSE, FOLKS DON'T
ANYWHERE TO GO.
NURSES CAN BE THAT GAP AND WE
WORKED TOGETHER AS A TEAM WITH
PHYSICIANS AND PROVIDE THAT CARE
>> Sreenivasan: DID YOU SEE ANY
THEMES EMERGING AS YOU
CRISSCROSSED THE COUNTRY AND
TALKED TO THESE DIFFERENT TYPES
OF NURSES?
WHAT MAKES THAT WANT TO DO THIS?
IS THERE A COMMON RED?
>> I WAS LOOKING FOR THAT.
I WAS LOOKING FOR THAT SECRET
MIX OF INGREDIENTS IS THAT LEADS
SOMEONE TO THIS PROFESSION.
I WANT SOME OF THAT.
I WANT TO KNOW WHAT THOSE
QUALITIES ARE.
SO SOMETIMES IT WAS THAT THEY
WERE THE ELDEST OF SIX KIDS AND
THEY TOOK CARE OF THEIR YOUNGER
BROTHERS AND SISTERS AND THEY
KNEW THEY HAD A CAPACITY TO
CARE.
OR MAYBE THERE WAS A GRANDPARENT
THAT WAS IN THE HOME THAT THEY
CARED FOR AT THE END OF LIFE.
THAT WAS A REALLY BIG INFLUENCE
ON PEOPLE, I FOUND.
BUT IN EACH INSTANCE I THINK
THAT THERE'S THIS KIND OF
PERSONAL WELL THAT THEY'RE JUST
ABLE TO DRAW UPON THAT THE REST
OF US DON'T NECESSARILY HAVE.
I TOLD RHONDA IN THE BEGINNING I
WAS ALWAYS LOOKING FOR WINGS ON
THE BACK OF THESE -- THE PEOPLE
THAT I WAS MEETING BECAUSE I WAS
EXPECTING THEM TO KIND OF SPROUT
WINGS AT SOME POINT ALONG THE
WAY.
BECAUSE I THOUGHT THEY WERE
SAINTS.
BUT THEY'RE NOT.
THEY'RE PEOPLE JUST LIKE US.
BUT THEY ARE DRIVEN TO CARE FOR
OTHER PEOPLE.
>> Suarez: THE BOOK IS CALLED
"AMERICAN NURSE."
CAROLYN JONES, RHONDA COLLINS,
THANKS SO MUCH FOR YOUR TIME.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: WE'VE ASSEMBLED A
LIST OF EIGHT TYPES OF NURSES
YOU'VE PROBABLY NEVER HEARD OF--
ROLLER DERBY NURSE, FOR EXAMPLE.
FIND THAT ONLINE.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
EGYPT'S MILITARY LEADERS TAPPED
A NEW PRIME MINISTER AND LAID
OUT A SIX-MONTH ROAD MAP TO
RETURN TO DEMOCRACY.
OFFICIALS INVESTIGATING THE
JETLINER CRASH IN SAN FRANCISCO
REPORTED TWO FLIGHT ATTENDANTS
WERE THROWN FROM THE PLANE ON
IMPACT.
THEY WERE HURT BUT SURVIVED.
>> Woodruff: ONLINE, SCIENCE
REPORTER JENNY MARDER
INVESTIGATES A MYSTERIOUS YELLOW
SUBSTANCE THAT'S INVADED HER
GARDEN.
SHE GETTHE S LOWDOWN ON SLIME
MOLD.
THAT'S ON OUR SCIENCE PAGE.
AND TONIGHT'S EDITION OF
FRONTLINE,THE STORY OF TWO
HARD-WORKING FAMILIES FOLLOWED
FOR MORE THAN 20 YEARS.
FIND A LINK TO "TWO AMERICAN
FAMILIES" ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
AND MUCH MORE IS AT
newshour.pbs.org.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT THE
PROMISE AND THE PERILS OF A BOOM
IN GOLD MINING IN THE WEST
AFRICAN NATION OF BURKINA FASO.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.